Like existing forms of artificial intelligence, generative AI is a disruptive force for humans. In the near term, CEOs need to work with their leadership teams as well as HR leaders to determine how this transformation should unfold within their organizations—redefining employees’ roles and responsibilities and adjusting operating models accordingly.

Now generative AI, in its capacity as a first-draft content generator, will augment many roles by increasing productivity, performance, and creativity. Employees in more clerical roles, such as paralegals and marketers, can use generative AI to create first drafts, allowing them to spend more of their time refining content and identifying new solutions. Coders will be able to focus on activities such as improving code quality on tight timelines and ensuring compliance with security requirements.

Of course, these changes cannot (and should not) happen in a vacuum. CEOs need to be aware of the effect that AI has on employees’ emotional well-being and professional identity. Productivity improvements are often conflated with reduction in overall staff, and AI has already stoked concern among employees; many college graduates believe AI will make their job irrelevant in a few years. But it’s also possible that AI will create as many jobs as it will displace.

The impact of AI is thus a critical culture and workforce issue, and CEOs should work with HR to understand how roles will evolve. As AI initiatives roll out, regular pulse checks should be conducted to track employee sentiment; CEOs will also need to develop a transparent change-management initiative that will both help employees embrace their new AI coworkers and ensure employees retain autonomy. The message should be that humans aren’t going anywhere—and in fact are needed to deploy AI effectively and ethically. (See Exhibit 2.)